Understanding Streams and Buffers in Node.js
Node.js is designed for building scalable network applications, and one of its key strengths is its ability to handle asynchronous I/O operations. Streams and buffers play a vital role in this context, enabling efficient data handling, particularly for large files or data chunks that need to be processed incrementally rather than all at once.

What is a Buffer?
A buffer is a temporary storage area for data being transferred from one place to another. In Node.js, a buffer represents a raw memory allocation outside the V8 JavaScript engine's heap, typically used for handling binary data directly.

Characteristics of Buffers:
Fixed Size: Once a buffer is created, its size cannot be changed.
Binary Data Storage: Buffers handle binary data (raw data) in the form of bytes.
Fast Access: Since buffers work with binary data, operations on buffers are generally faster than operations on strings or other data types in JavaScript.
Creating Buffers:
Buffers can be created in several ways using the Buffer class in Node.js:

javascript
Copy code
// Creating a buffer of length 10 filled with zeros
const buf1 = Buffer.alloc(10);

// Creating a buffer from an array of bytes
const buf2 = Buffer.from([1, 2, 3, 4]);

// Creating a buffer from a string
const buf3 = Buffer.from('Hello, World!');
Buffers are essential when dealing with streams, as they temporarily hold data chunks before they are processed or sent over the network.

What is a Stream?
A stream is an abstract interface for working with streaming data in Node.js. It allows handling data that’s coming in small chunks, piece by piece, rather than waiting for an entire dataset to be available.

Types of Streams:
Node.js implements several types of streams:

Readable Streams: Streams from which data can be read. Examples include HTTP requests, files being read, or data from a network socket.

Writable Streams: Streams to which data can be written. Examples include HTTP responses, files being written to, or data sent to a network socket.

Duplex Streams: Streams that are both readable and writable. An example is a TCP socket connection.

Transform Streams: A special type of duplex stream where the output is computed based on the input. An example is file compression.

How Streams Work:
Streams operate on the principle of reading or writing data in chunks rather than all at once. This makes streams highly efficient for processing large amounts of data or dealing with real-time data sources.

Readable Streams:
Readable streams emit data in chunks through the 'data' event and signal the end of data transmission with the 'end' event.

Example of a readable stream:

javascript
Copy code
const fs = require('fs');
const readableStream = fs.createReadStream('example.txt');

readableStream.on('data', (chunk) => {
  console.log(`Received ${chunk.length} bytes of data.`);
});

readableStream.on('end', () => {
  console.log('There will be no more data.');
});
Writable Streams:
Writable streams allow you to write data in chunks. You can use the .write() method to send data and the .end() method to signify the end of writing.

Example of a writable stream:

javascript
Copy code
const fs = require('fs');
const writableStream = fs.createWriteStream('example.txt');

writableStream.write('Hello, ');
writableStream.write('World!');
writableStream.end();

writableStream.on('finish', () => {
  console.log('All data has been written.');
});
Duplex Streams:
Duplex streams combine readable and writable functionalities. This is useful when you need to both read from and write to a stream, such as in TCP sockets.

Example of a duplex stream:

javascript
Copy code
const { Duplex } = require('stream');

class MyDuplex extends Duplex {
  constructor(options) {
    super(options);
    this.data = [];
  }

  _read(size) {
    this.push(this.data.length ? this.data.shift() : null);
  }

  _write(chunk, encoding, callback) {
    this.data.push(chunk);
    callback();
  }
}

const myDuplex = new MyDuplex();

myDuplex.on('data', (chunk) => {
  console.log(`Received: ${chunk.toString()}`);
});

myDuplex.write('Hello, ');
myDuplex.write('Duplex Stream!');
myDuplex.end();

myDuplex.on('finish', () => {
  console.log('Duplex stream finished.');
});
Transform Streams:
Transform streams are a special type of duplex stream that modifies the data as it is being read and written. This is useful for tasks like compression, encryption, or format transformation.

Example of a transform stream:

javascript
Copy code
const { Transform } = require('stream');

class UpperCaseTransform extends Transform {
  _transform(chunk, encoding, callback) {
    this.push(chunk.toString().toUpperCase());
    callback();
  }
}

const transformStream = new UpperCaseTransform();

transformStream.write('Hello, ');
transformStream.write('Transform Stream!');
transformStream.end();

transformStream.on('data', (chunk) => {
  console.log(chunk.toString()); // Outputs: 'HELLO, TRANSFORM STREAM!'
});
Practical Applications of Streams and Buffers:
Handling Large Files:
Instead of loading an entire file into memory, streams allow you to process files in chunks, reducing memory usage and improving performance.

Example:

javascript
Copy code
const fs = require('fs');
const zlib = require('zlib');

const readable = fs.createReadStream('largeFile.txt');
const writable = fs.createWriteStream('largeFile.txt.gz');
const gzip = zlib.createGzip();

readable.pipe(gzip).pipe(writable);

writable.on('finish', () => {
  console.log('File successfully compressed.');
});
Real-Time Data Processing:
Streams are ideal for processing data that arrives over time, such as video or audio streams, or real-time data from sensors.

Efficient Network Communication:
Streams are used to send and receive data over the network in chunks, which is more efficient than sending or receiving large payloads at once.

Memory Efficiency:
Buffers and streams are especially useful in environments where memory resources are limited, as they allow you to work with data incrementally rather than loading it all into memory at once.

Conclusion
Streams and buffers are fundamental concepts in Node.js that empower developers to build efficient, scalable applications. By understanding how to use these tools effectively, you can handle large data sets, optimize memory usage, and process data in real time. Whether you’re working with files, network communication, or real-time data streams, mastering streams and buffers will enhance your ability to create robust Node.js applications.



or the country, see Central African Republic. For other uses, see Car (disambiguation), CARS (disambiguation), and Automobile (disambiguation).
"Passenger car" redirects here. For the railroad car that carries passengers, see Passenger railroad car. For other uses, see Passenger car (disambiguation).

This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines. The reason given is: messy layout. Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure. (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)
Car

The Toyota Corolla, which has been in production since 1966, is the best-selling series of automobile in history.
Classification	Vehicle
Industry	Various
Application	Transportation
Fuel source	
Petrol
Diesel
Natural gas
Hydrogen
Biodiesel
Battery
Fuel cell
Solar cell
Hybrids of the above
Powered	Yes
Self-propelled	Yes
Wheels	3–6, most often 4
Axles	2, less commonly 3
Inventor	Carl Benz
Invented	1886 (138 years ago)
A car, or an automobile, is a motor vehicle with wheels. Most definitions of cars state that they run primarily on roads, seat one to eight people, have four wheels, and mainly transport people over cargo.[1][2] There are around one billion cars in use worldwide. The car is considered an essential part of the developed economy.[3]

The French inventor Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot built the first steam-powered road vehicle in 1769, while the Swiss inventor François Isaac de Rivaz designed and constructed the first internal combustion-powered automobile in 1808. The modern car—a practical, marketable automobile for everyday use—was invented in 1886, when the German inventor Carl Benz patented his Benz Patent-Motorwagen. Commercial cars became widely available during the 20th century. The 1901 Oldsmobile Curved Dash and the 1908 Ford Model T, both American cars, are widely considered the first mass-produced[4][5] and mass-affordable[6][7][8] cars, respectively. Cars were rapidly adopted in the US, where they replaced horse-drawn carriages.[9] In Europe and other parts of the world, demand for automobiles did not increase until after World War II.[10] In the 21st century, car usage is still increasing rapidly, especially in China, India, and other newly industrialised countries.[11][12]

Cars have controls for driving, parking, passenger comfort, and a variety of lamps. Over the decades, additional features and controls have been added to vehicles, making them progressively more complex. These include rear-reversing cameras, air conditioning, navigation systems, and in-car entertainment. Most cars in use in the early 2020s are propelled by an internal combustion engine, fueled by the combustion of fossil fuels. Electric cars, which were invented early in the history of the car, became commercially available in the 2000s and are predicted to cost less to buy than petrol-driven cars before 2025.[13][14] The transition from fossil fuel-powered cars to electric cars features prominently in most climate change mitigation scenarios,[15] such as Project Drawdown's 100 actionable solutions for climate change.[16]

There are costs and benefits to car use. The costs to the individual include acquiring the vehicle, interest payments (if the car is financed), repairs and maintenance, fuel, depreciation, driving time, parking fees, taxes, and insurance.[17] The costs to society include maintaining roads, land-use, road congestion, air pollution, noise pollution, public health, and disposing of the vehicle at the end of its life. Traffic collisions are the largest cause of injury-related deaths worldwide.[18] Personal benefits include on-demand transportation, mobility, independence, and convenience.[19] Societal benefits include economic benefits, such as job and wealth creation from the automotive industry, transportation provision, societal well-being from leisure and travel opportunities, and the generation of revenue from taxation. People's ability to move flexibly from place to place has far-reaching implications for the nature of societies.[20]

Etymology
The English word car is believed to originate from Latin carrus/carrum "wheeled vehicle" or (via Old North French) Middle English carre "two-wheeled cart", both of which in turn derive from Gaulish karros "chariot".[21][22] It originally referred to any wheeled horse-drawn vehicle, such as a cart, carriage, or wagon.[23][24]

"Motor car", attested from 1895, is the usual formal term in British English.[2] "Autocar", a variant likewise attested from 1895 and literally meaning "self-propelled car", is now considered archaic.[25] "Horseless carriage" is attested from 1895.[26]

"Automobile", a classical compound derived from Ancient Greek autós (αὐτός) "self" and Latin mobilis "movable", entered English from French and was first adopted by the Automobile Club of Great Britain in 1897.[27] It fell out of favour in Britain and is now used chiefly in North America,[28] where the abbreviated form "auto" commonly appears as an adjective in compound formations like "auto industry" and "auto mechanic".[29][30]

History
Main article: History of the automobile

This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. Specifically, detail should be moved to main article and summarized here. Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy. (September 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this message)

Steam machine of Verbiest, in 1678 (Ferdinand Verbiest)

Cugnot's 1771 fardier à vapeur, as preserved at the Musée des Arts et Métiers, Paris

Carl Benz, the inventor of the modern car

The original Benz Patent-Motorwagen, the first modern car, built in 1885 and awarded the patent for the concept

Bertha Benz, the first long distance driver

The Flocken Elektrowagen was the first four-wheeled electric car

Stuttgart, a cradle of the car[31][32] with Gottlieb Daimler and Wilhelm Maybach working there at the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft and place of the modern day headquarters of Mercedes-Benz Group and Porsche
In 1649, Hans Hautsch of Nuremberg built a clockwork-driven carriage.[33][34] The first steam-powered vehicle was designed by Ferdinand Verbiest, a Flemish member of a Jesuit mission in China around 1672. It was a 65-centimetre-long (26 in) scale-model toy for the Kangxi Emperor that was unable to carry a driver or a passenger.[19][35][36] It is not known with certainty if Verbiest's model was successfully built or run.[36]

Nicolas-Joseph Cugnot is widely credited with building the first full-scale, self-propelled mechanical vehicle in about 1769; he created a steam-powered tricycle.[37] He also constructed two steam tractors for the French Army, one of which is preserved in the French National Conservatory of Arts and Crafts.[37] His inventions were limited by problems with water supply and maintaining steam pressure.[37] In 1801, Richard Trevithick built and demonstrated his Puffing Devil road locomotive, believed by many to be the first demonstration of a steam-powered road vehicle. It was unable to maintain sufficient steam pressure for long periods and was of little practical use.

The development of external combustion (steam) engines is detailed as part of the history of the car but often treated separately from the development of true cars. A variety of steam-powered road vehicles were used during the first part of the 19th century, including steam cars, steam buses, phaetons, and steam rollers. In the United Kingdom, sentiment against them led to the Locomotive Acts of 1865.

In 1807, Nicéphore Niépce and his brother Claude created what was probably the world's first internal combustion engine (which they called a Pyréolophore), but installed it in a boat on the river Saone in France.[38] Coincidentally, in 1807, the Swiss inventor François Isaac de Rivaz designed his own "de Rivaz internal combustion engine", and used it to develop the world's first vehicle to be powered by such an engine. The Niépces' Pyréolophore was fuelled by a mixture of Lycopodium powder (dried spores of the Lycopodium plant), finely crushed coal dust and resin that were mixed with oil, whereas de Rivaz used a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen.[38] Neither design was successful, as was the case with others, such as Samuel Brown, Samuel Morey, and Etienne Lenoir,[39] who each built vehicles (usually adapted carriages or carts) powered by internal combustion engines.[40]

In November 1881, French inventor Gustave Trouvé demonstrated a three-wheeled car powered by electricity at the International Exposition of Electricity.[41] Although several other German engineers (including Gottlieb Daimler, Wilhelm Maybach, and Siegfried Marcus) were working on cars at about the same time, the year 1886 is regarded as the birth year of the modern car—a practical, marketable automobile for everyday use—when the German Carl Benz patented his Benz Patent-Motorwagen; he is generally acknowledged as the inventor of the car.[40][42][43]

In 1879, Benz was granted a patent for his first engine, which had been designed in 1878. Many of his other inventions made the use of the internal combustion engine feasible for powering a vehicle. His first Motorwagen was built in 1885 in Mannheim, Germany. He was awarded the patent for its invention as of his application on 29 January 1886 (under the auspices of his major company, Benz & Cie., which was founded in 1883). Benz began promotion of the vehicle on 3 July 1886, and about 25 Benz vehicles were sold between 1888 and 1893, when his first four-wheeler was introduced along with a cheaper model. They also were powered with four-stroke engines of his own design. Emile Roger of France, already producing Benz engines under license, now added the Benz car to his line of products. Because France was more open to the early cars, initially more were built and sold in France through Roger than Benz sold in Germany. In August 1888, Bertha Benz, the wife and business partner of Carl Benz, undertook the first road trip by car, to prove the road-worthiness of her husband's invention.[44]

In 1896, Benz designed and patented the first internal-combustion flat engine, called boxermotor. During the last years of the 19th century, Benz was the largest car company in the world with 572 units produced in 1899 and, because of its size, Benz & Cie., became a joint-stock company. The first motor car in central Europe and one of the first factory-made cars in the world, was produced by Czech company Nesselsdorfer Wagenbau (later renamed to Tatra) in 1897, the Präsident automobil.

Daimler and Maybach founded Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft (DMG) in Cannstatt in 1890, and sold their first car in 1892 under the brand name Daimler. It was a horse-drawn stagecoach built by another manufacturer, which they retrofitted with an engine of their design. By 1895, about 30 vehicles had been built by Daimler and Maybach, either at the Daimler works or in the Hotel Hermann, where they set up shop after disputes with their backers. Benz, Maybach, and the Daimler team seem to have been unaware of each other's early work. They never worked together; by the time of the merger of the two companies, Daimler and Maybach were no longer part of DMG. Daimler died in 1900 and later that year, Maybach designed an engine named Daimler-Mercedes that was placed in a specially ordered model built to specifications set by Emil Jellinek. This was a production of a small number of vehicles for Jellinek to race and market in his country. Two years later, in 1902, a new model DMG car was produced and the model was named Mercedes after the Maybach engine, which generated 35 hp. Maybach quit DMG shortly thereafter and opened a business of his own. Rights to the Daimler brand name were sold to other manufacturers.

In 1890, Émile Levassor and Armand Peugeot of France began producing vehicles with Daimler engines, and so laid the foundation of the automotive industry in France. In 1891, Auguste Doriot and his Peugeot colleague Louis Rigoulot completed the longest trip by a petrol-driven vehicle when their self-designed and built Daimler powered Peugeot Type 3 completed 2,100 kilometres (1,300 mi) from Valentigney to Paris and Brest and back again. They were attached to the first Paris–Brest–Paris bicycle race, but finished six days after the winning cyclist, Charles Terront.

The first design for an American car with a petrol internal combustion engine was made in 1877 by George Selden of Rochester, New York. Selden applied for a patent for a car in 1879, but the patent application expired because the vehicle was never built. After a delay of 16 years and a series of attachments to his application, on 5 November 1895, Selden was granted a US patent (U.S. patent 549,160) for a two-stroke car engine, which hindered, more than encouraged, development of cars in the United States. His patent was challenged by Henry Ford and others, and overturned in 1911.

In 1893, the first running, petrol-driven American car was built and road-tested by the Duryea brothers of Springfield, Massachusetts. The first public run of the Duryea Motor Wagon took place on 21 September 1893, on Taylor Street in Metro Center Springfield.[45][46] Studebaker, subsidiary of a long-established wagon and coach manufacturer, started to build cars in 1897[47]: 66  and commenced sales of electric vehicles in 1902 and petrol vehicles in 1904.[48]

In Britain, there had been several attempts to build steam cars with varying degrees of success, with Thomas Rickett even attempting a production run in 1860.[49] Santler from Malvern is recognised by the Veteran Car Club of Great Britain as having made the first petrol-driven car in the country in 1894,[50] followed by Frederick William Lanchester in 1895, but these were both one-offs.[50] The first production vehicles in Great Britain came from the Daimler Company, a company founded by Harry J. Lawson in 1896, after purchasing the right to use the name of the engines. Lawson's company made its first car in 1897, and they bore the name Daimler.[50]

In 1892, German engineer Rudolf Diesel was granted a patent for a "New Rational Combustion Engine". In 1897, he built the first diesel engine.[40] Steam-, electric-, and petrol-driven vehicles competed for a few decades, with petrol internal combustion engines achieving dominance in the 1910s. Although various pistonless rotary engine designs have attempted to compete with the conventional piston and crankshaft design, only Mazda's version of the Wankel engine has had more than very limited success.

All in all, it is estimated that over 100,000 patents created the modern automobile and motorcycle.[51]

Mass production
See also: Automotive industry

Ransom E. Olds founded Olds Motor Vehicle Company (Oldsmobile) in 1897.

Ford Motor Company automobile assembly line in the 1920s

The Toyota Corolla is the best-selling car of all-time.
Large-scale, production-line manufacturing of affordable cars was started by Ransom Olds in 1901 at his Oldsmobile factory in Lansing, Michigan, and based upon stationary assembly line techniques pioneered by Marc Isambard Brunel at the Portsmouth Block Mills, England, in 1802. The assembly line style of mass production and interchangeable parts had been pioneered in the US by Thomas Blanchard in 1821, at the Springfield Armory in Springfield, Massachusetts.[52] This concept was greatly expanded by Henry Ford, beginning in 1913 with the world's first moving assembly line for cars at the Highland Park Ford Plant.

As a result, Ford's cars came off the line in 15-minute intervals, much faster than previous methods, increasing productivity eightfold, while using less manpower (from 12.5 manhours to 1 hour 33 minutes).[53] It was so successful, paint became a bottleneck. Only Japan black would dry fast enough, forcing the company to drop the variety of colours available before 1913, until fast-drying Duco lacquer was developed in 1926. This is the source of Ford's apocryphal remark, "any color as long as it's black".[53] In 1914, an assembly line worker could buy a Model T with four months' pay.[53]

Ford's complex safety procedures—especially assigning each worker to a specific location instead of allowing them to roam about—dramatically reduced the rate of injury.[54] The combination of high wages and high efficiency is called "Fordism" and was copied by most major industries. The efficiency gains from the assembly line also coincided with the economic rise of the US. The assembly line forced workers to work at a certain pace with very repetitive motions which led to more output per worker while other countries were using less productive methods.

In the automotive industry, its success was dominating, and quickly spread worldwide seeing the founding of Ford France and Ford Britain in 1911, Ford Denmark 1923, Ford Germany 1925; in 1921, Citroën was the first native European manufacturer to adopt the production method. Soon, companies had to have assembly lines, or risk going broke; by 1930, 250 companies which did not, had disappeared.[53]

Development of automotive technology was rapid, due in part to the hundreds of small manufacturers competing to gain the world's attention. Key developments included electric ignition and the electric self-starter (both by Charles Kettering, for the Cadillac Motor Company in 1910–1911), independent suspension, and four-wheel brakes.

Since the 1920s, nearly all cars have been mass-produced to meet market needs, so marketing plans often have heavily influenced car design. It was Alfred P. Sloan who established the idea of different makes of cars produced by one company, called the General Motors Companion Make Program, so that buyers could "move up" as their fortunes improved.

Reflecting the rapid pace of change, makes shared parts with one another so larger production volume resulted in lower costs for each price range. For example, in the 1930s, LaSalles, sold by Cadillac, used cheaper mechanical parts made by Oldsmobile; in the 1950s, Chevrolet shared bonnet, doors, roof, and windows with Pontiac; by the 1990s, corporate powertrains and shared platforms (with interchangeable brakes, suspension, and other parts) were common. Even so, only major makers could afford high costs, and even companies with decades of production, such as Apperson, Cole, Dorris, Haynes, or Premier, could not manage: of some two hundred American car makers in existence in 1920, only 43 survived in 1930, and with the Great Depression, by 1940, only 17 of those were left.[53]

In Europe, much the same would happen. Morris set up its production line at Cowley in 1924, and soon outsold Ford, while beginning in 1923 to follow Ford's practice of vertical integration, buying Hotchkiss' British subsidiary (engines), Wrigley (gearboxes), and Osberton (radiators), for instance, as well as competitors, such as Wolseley: in 1925, Morris had 41 per cent of total British car production. Most British small-car assemblers, from Abbey to Xtra, had gone under. Citroën did the same in France, coming to cars in 1919; between them and other cheap cars in reply such as Renault's 10CV and Peugeot's 5CV, they produced 550,000 cars in 1925, and Mors, Hurtu, and others could not compete.[53] Germany's first mass-manufactured car, the Opel 4PS Laubfrosch (Tree Frog), came off the line at Rüsselsheim in 1924, soon making Opel the top car builder in Germany, with 37.5 per cent of the market.[53]

In Japan, car production was very limited before World War II. Only a handful of companies were producing vehicles in limited numbers, and these were small, three-wheeled for commercial uses, like Daihatsu, or were the result of partnering with European companies, like Isuzu building the Wolseley A-9 in 1922. Mitsubishi was also partnered with Fiat and built the Mitsubishi Model A based on a Fiat vehicle. Toyota, Nissan, Suzuki, Mazda, and Honda began as companies producing non-automotive products before the war, switching to car production during the 1950s. Kiichiro Toyoda's decision to take Toyoda Loom Works into automobile manufacturing would create what would eventually become Toyota Motor Corporation, the largest automobile manufacturer in the world. Subaru, meanwhile, was formed from a conglomerate of six companies who banded together as Fuji Heavy Industries, as a result of having been broken up under keiretsu legislation.

Components and design
Propulsion and fuels
See also: Alternative fuel vehicle

2011 Nissan Leaf electric car

The weight of the low battery stabilises the car.[55] This is a dual-motor, four-wheel-drive layout but many cars only have one motor.
Fossil fuels
The transport sector is a major contributor to air pollution, noise pollution and climate change.[56]

Most cars in use in the early 2020s run on petrol burnt in an internal combustion engine (ICE). The International Organization of Motor Vehicle Manufacturers says that, in countries that mandate low sulphur motor spirit, petrol-fuelled cars built to late 2010s standards (such as Euro-6) emit very little local air pollution.[57][58] Some cities ban older petrol-driven cars and some countries plan to ban sales in future. However, some environmental groups say this phase-out of fossil fuel vehicles must be brought forwards to limit climate change. Production of petrol-fuelled cars peaked in 2017.[59][60]

Other hydrocarbon fossil fuels also burnt by deflagration (rather than detonation) in ICE cars include diesel, autogas, and CNG. Removal of fossil fuel subsidies,[61][62] concerns about oil dependence, tightening environmental laws and restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions are propelling work on alternative power systems for cars. This includes hybrid vehicles, plug-in electric vehicles and hydrogen vehicles. Out of all cars sold in 2021, nine per cent were electric, and by the end of that year there were more than 16 million electric cars on the world's roads.[63] Despite rapid growth, less than two per cent of cars on the world's roads were fully electric and plug-in hybrid cars by the end of 2021.[63] Cars for racing or speed records have sometimes employed jet or rocket engines, but these are impractical for common use.

Oil consumption has increased rapidly in the 20th and 21st centuries because there are more cars; the 1980s oil glut even fuelled the sales of low-economy vehicles in OECD countries. The BRIC countries are adding to this consumption.

As of 2023 few production cars use wheel hub motors.[64][65]

Batteries
Main article: Electric vehicle battery
See also: Electric car § Batteries, and Automotive battery
In almost all hybrid (even mild hybrid) and pure electric cars regenerative braking recovers and returns to a battery some energy which would otherwise be wasted by friction brakes getting hot.[66] Although all cars must have friction brakes (front disc brakes and either disc or drum rear brakes[67]) for emergency stops, regenerative braking improves efficiency, particularly in city driving.[68]

User interface
Main article: Car controls

In the Ford Model T the left-side hand lever sets the rear wheel parking brakes and puts the transmission in neutral. The lever to the right controls the throttle. The lever on the left of the steering column is for ignition timing. The left foot pedal changes the two forward gears while the centre pedal controls reverse. The right pedal is the brake.
Cars are equipped with controls used for driving, passenger comfort, and safety, normally operated by a combination of the use of feet and hands, and occasionally by voice on 21st-century cars. These controls include a steering wheel, pedals for operating the brakes and controlling the car's speed (and, in a manual transmission car, a clutch pedal), a shift lever or stick for changing gears, and a number of buttons and dials for turning on lights, ventilation, and other functions. Modern cars' controls are now standardised, such as the location for the accelerator and brake, but this was not always the case. Controls are evolving in response to new technologies, for example, the electric car and the integration of mobile communications.

Some of the original controls are no longer required. For example, all cars once had controls for the choke valve, clutch, ignition timing, and a crank instead of an electric starter. However, new controls have also been added to vehicles, making them more complex. These include air conditioning, navigation systems, and in-car entertainment. Another trend is the replacement of physical knobs and switches by secondary controls with touchscreen controls such as BMW's iDrive and Ford's MyFord Touch. Another change is that while early cars' pedals were physically linked to the brake mechanism and throttle, in the early 2020s, cars have increasingly replaced these physical linkages with electronic controls.

Electronics and interior

Panel for fuses and circuit breakers
Cars are typically equipped with interior lighting which can be toggled manually or be set to light up automatically with doors open, an entertainment system which originated from car radios, sideways windows which can be lowered or raised electrically (manually on earlier cars), and one or multiple auxiliary power outlets for supplying portable appliances such as mobile phones, portable fridges, power inverters, and electrical air pumps from the on-board electrical system.[69][70][a] More costly upper-class and luxury cars are equipped with features earlier such as massage seats and collision avoidance systems.[71][72]

Dedicated automotive fuses and circuit breakers prevent damage from electrical overload.

Lighting
Main article: Automotive lighting

Audi A4 daytime running lights
Cars are typically fitted with multiple types of lights. These include headlights, which are used to illuminate the way ahead and make the car visible to other users, so that the vehicle can be used at night; in some jurisdictions, daytime running lights; red brake lights to indicate when the brakes are applied; amber turn signal lights to indicate the turn intentions of the driver; white-coloured reverse lights to illuminate the area behind the car (and indicate that the driver will be or is reversing); and on some vehicles, additional lights (e.g., side marker lights) to increase the visibility of the car. Interior lights on the ceiling of the car are usually fitted for the driver and passengers. Some vehicles also have a boot light and, more rarely, an engine compartment light.

Weight and size

A Chevrolet Suburban extended-length SUV weighs 3,300 kilograms (7,200 lb) (gross weight).[73]
During the late 20th and early 21st century, cars increased in weight due to batteries,[74] modern steel safety cages, anti-lock brakes, airbags, and "more-powerful—if more efficient—engines"[75] and, as of 2019, typically weigh between 1 and 3 tonnes (1.1 and 3.3 short tons; 0.98 and 2.95 long tons).[76] Heavier cars are safer for the driver from a crash perspective, but more dangerous for other vehicles and road users.[75] The weight of a car influences fuel consumption and performance, with more weight resulting in increased fuel consumption and decreased performance. The Wuling Hongguang Mini EV, a typical city car, weighs about 700 kilograms (1,500 lb). Heavier cars include SUVs and extended-length SUVs like the Suburban. Cars have also become wider.[77]

Some places tax heavier cars more:[78] as well as improving pedestrian safety this can encourage manufacturers to use materials such as recycled aluminium instead of steel.[79] It has been suggested that one benefit of subsidising charging infrastructure is that cars can use lighter batteries.[80]

Seating and body style
See also: Car body style, Car classification, Truck classification, and Vehicle size class
Most cars are designed to carry multiple occupants, often with fo